PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZATIONS.md, before:

# Performance Optimizations - lighthouse-optimizations Branch

## Overview
This document details all performance optimizations implemented to improve Lighthouse scores from ~55 to target 85+.

## Implemented Optimizations

### Phase 1: Immediate Optimizations (< 1 hour)

#### 1. Vite Build Configuration (`vite.config.ts`)
- **Minification**: Enabled Terser minification for production builds
  - Removes comments and unnecessary whitespace
  - Mangles variable names for smaller bundle size
  
- **Compression**: Added dual compression strategy
  - **Brotli** (.br files): Better compression ratio (~72% reduction on main bundle)
  - **Gzip** (.gz files): Better browser support (~73% reduction on main bundle)
  - Only compresses files > 1KB (threshold optimization)
  
- **Modern Build Target**: Set to ES2015
  - Removes unnecessary polyfills
  - Smaller bundle size
  - Better performance on modern browsers
  
- **Code Splitting**: Manual chunk configuration
  - `react-vendor`: React core libraries (158.71 KB → 51.77 KB gzip)
  - `react-admin`: React Admin framework (741.68 KB → 203.14 KB gzip)
  - `mui`: Material-UI components (89.65 KB → 25.74 KB gzip)
  - `lodash`: Utility library (70.89 KB → 25.19 KB gzip)

#### 2. Conditional Dev-Only Logging (`src/providers/dataProvider.ts`)
- Created `isDev` flag using `import.meta.env.DEV`
- Created `devLog()` and `devError()` helper functions
- Replaced all `console.log()` and `console.error()` calls
- **Result**: No console output in production builds (removed by tree-shaking)

### Phase 2: Short-term Optimizations (1-2 days)

#### 3. Code Splitting with Lazy Loading (`src/App.tsx`)
- Converted all resource imports to `lazy()` imports
- Added `Suspense` wrapper with loading fallback
- **Resources lazy-loaded**:
  - Users (List, Create, Edit, Show, Profile)
  - Tenants (List, Create)
  - Feature Flags (List, Create, Edit, Show)
  - Policies (List, Create, Edit, Show)
  - Invitations (List, Show)
  - Audit Events (List, Show)
  - System monitoring (Health, Config, Logs, Metrics)

- **Benefits**:
  - Initial bundle size reduced
  - Only loads code when needed
  - Faster initial page load
  - Better caching strategy

#### 4. DataProvider Memoization (`src/App.tsx`)
- Wrapped `createDataProvider()` call in `useMemo()`
- Dependency: `selectedTenantId`
- **Result**: Prevents unnecessary dataProvider recreations

#### 5. Debounced Search Inputs
- **UserList** (`src/resources/users/UserList.tsx`):
  - Added debounced email search (500ms delay)
  - Reduces API calls while typing
  
- **FeatureFlagList** (`src/resources/featureFlags/index.tsx`):
  - Added debounced key search (500ms delay)
  - Added state filter for better UX

#### 6. Dependency Audit
- Installed lodash for debouncing (`lodash` + `@types/lodash`)
- All existing dependencies reviewed - no unused packages found
- Package.json is clean and optimized

### Phase 3: Long-term Optimizations (1 week)

#### 7. Proper Pagination (`src/providers/dataProvider.ts`)
- Added `getPaginationParams()` helper function
- Updated all `getList()` implementations to include pagination:
  - **Users**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`
  - **Tenants**: `?page=1&per_page=10`
  - **Feature Flags**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`
  - **Policies**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`
  - **Audit Events**: `?page=1&per_page=10`
  - **Invitations**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`

- Updated response handling to extract `total` from API responses
- **Benefits**:
  - Reduces network payload
  - Faster API responses
  - Better user experience with large datasets
  - Server-side pagination support

## Build Results

### Bundle Size Analysis (with compression)

| Chunk | Original | Gzip | Brotli | Savings (Brotli) |
|-------|----------|------|--------|------------------|
| react-admin | 741.68 KB | 203.14 KB | 161.31 KB | 78.2% |
| react-vendor | 158.71 KB | 51.77 KB | 43.99 KB | 72.3% |
| mui | 89.65 KB | 25.74 KB | 22.06 KB | 75.4% |
| lodash | 70.89 KB | 25.19 KB | 21.63 KB | 69.5% |
| Main app | 63.34 KB | 22.15 KB | 19.32 KB | 69.5% |

### Key Metrics
- **Total Bundle Size**: ~1.16 MB (uncompressed)
- **Gzip Total**: ~331 KB (71% reduction)
- **Brotli Total**: ~268 KB (77% reduction)
- **Lazy-loaded chunks**: 13 separate chunks for on-demand loading
- **Network payload reduction**: ~70-77% with compression

## Expected Performance Improvements

### Lighthouse Score Predictions
- **Before**: ~55
- **Target**: 85+
- **Expected**: 85-90

### Key Improvements
1. **First Contentful Paint (FCP)**: -40% (lazy loading)
2. **Largest Contentful Paint (LCP)**: -35% (code splitting + compression)
3. **Time to Interactive (TTI)**: -50% (smaller initial bundle)
4. **Total Blocking Time (TBT)**: -45% (code splitting)
5. **Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)**: No change (already optimized)

## Testing Checklist

- [x] Build completes successfully
- [x] All resources lazy-load correctly
- [ ] Auth flow works (login/logout)
- [ ] CRUD operations work on all resources
- [ ] Filters and search work correctly
- [ ] Tenant switching works for superadmin
- [ ] Responsive design maintained
- [ ] No console errors in production
- [ ] Lighthouse audit shows 85+ score

## Next Steps

1. **Deploy to staging** and run Lighthouse audit
2. **Monitor bundle sizes** in CI/CD
3. **Consider additional optimizations**:
   - Image optimization (if images added)
   - Service Worker for offline support
   - HTTP/2 server push for critical resources
   - Preloading/prefetching critical chunks

## Maintenance Notes

- **Dev logs**: Use `devLog()` and `devError()` instead of `console.log/error`
- **Lazy imports**: Add new resources to lazy loading pattern in `App.tsx`
- **Pagination**: Ensure all new resources implement pagination in dataProvider
- **Chunk splitting**: Update `vite.config.ts` if adding large new dependencies

## Performance Budget

| Metric | Budget | Current | Status |
|--------|--------|---------|--------|
| Initial JS | < 300 KB (gzip) | ~331 KB | 🟡 Close |
| Lighthouse Score | > 85 | TBD | ⏳ Pending |
| FCP | < 2s | TBD | ⏳ Pending |
| LCP | < 2.5s | TBD | ⏳ Pending |
| TTI | < 3.5s | TBD | ⏳ Pending |

## Rollback Plan

If issues arise, revert to main branch:
```bash
git checkout main
npm install
npm run build
```

All changes are isolated on `lighthouse-optimizations` branch.

Commit message:

feat: enhance performance documentation and testing instructions; streamline component imports

PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZATIONS.md, after:

# Performance Optimizations - lighthouse-optimizations Branch

## Overview
This document details all performance optimizations implemented to improve Lighthouse scores from ~55 to target 85+.

## Implemented Optimizations

### Phase 1: Immediate Optimizations (< 1 hour)

#### 1. Vite Build Configuration (`vite.config.ts`)
- **Minification**: Enabled Terser minification for production builds
  - Removes comments and unnecessary whitespace
  - Mangles variable names for smaller bundle size
  
- **Compression**: Added dual compression strategy
  - **Brotli** (.br files): Better compression ratio (~72% reduction on main bundle)
  - **Gzip** (.gz files): Better browser support (~73% reduction on main bundle)
  - Only compresses files > 1KB (threshold optimization)
  
- **Modern Build Target**: Set to ES2015
  - Removes unnecessary polyfills
  - Smaller bundle size
  - Better performance on modern browsers
  
- **Code Splitting**: Manual chunk configuration
  - `react-vendor`: React core libraries (158.71 KB → 51.77 KB gzip)
  - `react-admin`: React Admin framework (741.68 KB → 203.14 KB gzip)
  - `mui`: Material-UI components (89.65 KB → 25.74 KB gzip)
  - `lodash`: Utility library (70.89 KB → 25.19 KB gzip)

#### 2. Conditional Dev-Only Logging (`src/providers/dataProvider.ts`)
- Created `isDev` flag using `import.meta.env.DEV`
- Created `devLog()` and `devError()` helper functions
- Replaced all `console.log()` and `console.error()` calls
- **Result**: No console output in production builds (removed by tree-shaking)

### Phase 2: Short-term Optimizations (1-2 days)

#### 3. Code Splitting with Lazy Loading (`src/App.tsx`)
- Converted all resource imports to `lazy()` imports
- Added `Suspense` wrapper with loading fallback
- **Resources lazy-loaded**:
  - Users (List, Create, Edit, Show, Profile)
  - Tenants (List, Create)
  - Feature Flags (List, Create, Edit, Show)
  - Policies (List, Create, Edit, Show)
  - Invitations (List, Show)
  - Audit Events (List, Show)
  - System monitoring (Health, Config, Logs, Metrics)

- **Benefits**:
  - Initial bundle size reduced
  - Only loads code when needed
  - Faster initial page load
  - Better caching strategy

#### 4. DataProvider Memoization (`src/App.tsx`)
- Wrapped `createDataProvider()` call in `useMemo()`
- Dependency: `selectedTenantId`
- **Result**: Prevents unnecessary dataProvider recreations

#### 5. Debounced Search Inputs
- **UserList** (`src/resources/users/UserList.tsx`):
  - Added debounced email search (500ms delay)
  - Reduces API calls while typing
  
- **FeatureFlagList** (`src/resources/featureFlags/index.tsx`):
  - Added debounced key search (500ms delay)
  - Added state filter for better UX

#### 6. Dependency Audit
- Installed lodash for debouncing (`lodash` + `@types/lodash`)
- All existing dependencies reviewed - no unused packages found
- Package.json is clean and optimized

### Phase 3: Long-term Optimizations (1 week)

#### 7. Proper Pagination (`src/providers/dataProvider.ts`)
- Added `getPaginationParams()` helper function
- Updated all `getList()` implementations to include pagination:
  - **Users**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`
  - **Tenants**: `?page=1&per_page=10`
  - **Feature Flags**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`
  - **Policies**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`
  - **Audit Events**: `?page=1&per_page=10`
  - **Invitations**: `?page=1&per_page=10&tenant_id=xxx`

- Updated response handling to extract `total` from API responses
- **Benefits**:
  - Reduces network payload
  - Faster API responses
  - Better user experience with large datasets
  - Server-side pagination support

## Build Results

### Bundle Size Analysis (with compression)

| Chunk | Original | Gzip | Brotli | Savings (Brotli) |
|-------|----------|------|--------|------------------|
| react-admin | 741.68 KB | 203.14 KB | 161.31 KB | 78.2% |
| react-vendor | 158.71 KB | 51.77 KB | 43.99 KB | 72.3% |
| mui | 89.65 KB | 25.74 KB | 22.06 KB | 75.4% |
| lodash | 70.89 KB | 25.19 KB | 21.63 KB | 69.5% |
| Main app | 63.34 KB | 22.15 KB | 19.32 KB | 69.5% |

### Key Metrics
- **Total Bundle Size**: ~1.16 MB (uncompressed)
- **Gzip Total**: ~331 KB (71% reduction)
- **Brotli Total**: ~268 KB (77% reduction)
- **Lazy-loaded chunks**: 13 separate chunks for on-demand loading
- **Network payload reduction**: ~70-77% with compression

## Expected Performance Improvements

### Lighthouse Score Predictions
- **Before**: ~55
- **Target**: 85+
- **Expected**: 85-90

### Key Improvements
1. **First Contentful Paint (FCP)**: -40% (lazy loading)
2. **Largest Contentful Paint (LCP)**: -35% (code splitting + compression)
3. **Time to Interactive (TTI)**: -50% (smaller initial bundle)
4. **Total Blocking Time (TBT)**: -45% (code splitting)
5. **Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)**: No change (already optimized)

## Testing Checklist

- [x] Build completes successfully
- [x] All resources lazy-load correctly
- [x] Preview server works correctly
- [ ] Auth flow works (login/logout)
- [ ] CRUD operations work on all resources
- [ ] Filters and search work correctly
- [ ] Tenant switching works for superadmin
- [ ] Responsive design maintained
- [ ] No console errors in production
- [ ] Lighthouse audit shows 85+ score

## Testing Instructions

See [TESTING_GUIDE.md](./TESTING_GUIDE.md) for detailed testing instructions.

**Quick Test**:
```bash
npm run build && npm run preview
```
Then open http://localhost:4173/ (or 4174 if 4173 is in use) in your browser.

## Next Steps

1. **Deploy to staging** and run Lighthouse audit
2. **Monitor bundle sizes** in CI/CD
3. **Consider additional optimizations**:
   - Image optimization (if images added)
   - Service Worker for offline support
   - HTTP/2 server push for critical resources
   - Preloading/prefetching critical chunks

## Maintenance Notes

- **Dev logs**: Use `devLog()` and `devError()` instead of `console.log/error`
- **Lazy imports**: Add new resources to lazy loading pattern in `App.tsx`
- **Pagination**: Ensure all new resources implement pagination in dataProvider
- **Chunk splitting**: Update `vite.config.ts` if adding large new dependencies

## Performance Budget

| Metric | Budget | Current | Status |
|--------|--------|---------|--------|
| Initial JS | < 300 KB (gzip) | ~331 KB | 🟡 Close |
| Lighthouse Score | > 85 | TBD | ⏳ Pending |
| FCP | < 2s | TBD | ⏳ Pending |
| LCP | < 2.5s | TBD | ⏳ Pending |
| TTI | < 3.5s | TBD | ⏳ Pending |

## Rollback Plan

If issues arise, revert to main branch:
```bash
git checkout main
npm install
npm run build
```

All changes are isolated on `lighthouse-optimizations` branch.
